In this lecture,
we will look at the decision tree model,
a popular method used for classification.
After this video, you will be able to
explain how a decision tree is used for
classification.
Describe the process of constructing
a decision tree for classification.
And interpret how a decision tree comes
up with a classification decision.
The idea behind decision trees for
classification is to split the data
into subsets where each subset
belongs to only one class.
This is accomplished by dividing
the input space into pure regions,
that is regions with samples
from only one class.
With real data completely pure
subsets may not be possible.
So the goal is to divide the data into
subsets that are as pure as possible.
That is each subset contains as many
samples as possible from a single class.
Graphically this is equivalent to dividing
the input space into regions that are as
pure as possible.
Boundaries separating these regions
are called decision boundaries.
And the decision tree model
makes classification decisions
based on these decision boundaries.
A decision tree is a hierarchical
structure with nodes and directed edges.
The node at the top is
called the root node.
The nodes at the bottom
are called the leaf nodes.
Nodes that are neither the root node or
the leaf nodes are called internal nodes.
The root and
internal nodes have test conditions,
each leaf node has a class
label associated with it.
A classification decision is made
by traversing the decision tree
starting with the root node.
At each node the answer to the test
condition determines which
branch to traverse to.
When a leaf node is reached
the category at the leaf node
determines the classification decision.
The depth of a node is the number of
edges from the root node to that node.
The depth of the root node is 0.
The depth of a decision
tree is the number of edges
in the longest path from
the root node to the leaf node.
The size of a decision tree is
the number of nodes in the tree.
This is an example of a decision tree.
It can be used to classify an animal
as a mammal or not a mammal.
According to this decision tree,
if an animal is warm-blooded,
gives live birth, and
is a vertebrate, then it is a mammal.
If an animal does not have all
of these three characteristics,
then it is not a mammal.
A decision tree is built by starting
with all samples at a single node,
the root node.
Additional nodes are added when
the data is split into subsets.
At a high level, constructing a decision
tree consists of the following steps.
Start with all samples and a node,
partition the samples into subsets
based in the input variables.
The goal is to create subsets of
records that are purest, that is
each subset contains as many samples as
possible, belonging to just one class.
Another way to say this is that
the subsets should be as homogeneous or
as pure as possible.
Repeatedly partition data into
successively purer subsets
until some stopping
criterion is satisfied.
An algorithm for
constructing a decision tree model is
referred to as an induction algorithm.
So you may hear the term tree induction
used to describe the process of
building a decision tree.
Note that at each split
the induction algorithm
only considers the best way to split
that particular portion of the data.
This is referred to as a greedy approach.
Greedy algorithms solve a subset
of the problem at a time, and
as a necessary approach when solving
the entire problem is not feasible.
This is the case with decision trees.
It is not feasible to determine
the best tree given a data set, so
the tree has to be built
in piecemeal fashion
by determining the best way to split
the current node at each step.
And combining these decisions together
to form the final decision tree,
in constructing a decision tree
how is the data partitioned?
How does a decision tree
determine the best way to split
the set of samples at a node?
Again the goal is to partition data
at a node into subsets that are as
pure as possible.
In this example,
the partition shown on the right
results in more homogeneous subsets.
Since these subsets contain more
samples belonging to a single class
than the resulting subsets
shown on the left.
So the partition on the right
results in purer subsets and
is the preferred partition.
Therefore, we need a way to
measure the purity of a split
in order to compare different
ways to partition a set of data.
It turns out that it works out better
mathematically if we measure the impurity
rather than the purity of a split.
So the impurity measure of a node
specifies how mixed
the resulting subsets are.
Since we want the resulting subsets
to have homogeneous class labels,
not mixed class labels, we want the split
that minimizes the impurity measure.
A common impurity measure used for
determining the best
split is the Gini Index.
The lower the Gini Index the higher
the purity of the split.
So the decision tree will select
the split that minimizes the Gini Index.
Besides the Gini Index, other
impurity measures include entropy, or
information gain, and
misclassification rate.
The other factor in determining
the best way to partition a node
is which variable to split on.
The decision tree will test all variables
to determine the best way to split a node
using a purity measure such as
the Gini index to compare the various
possibilities.
Recall that the tree induction algorithm
repeatedly splits nodes to get more and
more homogeneous subsets.
So when does this process stop?
When does the algorithm
stop growing the tree?
There's several criteria that can be used
to determine when a node should no longer
be split into subsets.
The induction algorithm can
stop expanding a node when
all samples in the node
have the same class label.
This means that this set of data
is as pure as possible, and
further splitting will not result in
any better partition of the data.
Since getting completely pure subsets
is difficult to achieve with real data,
this stopping criterion can be modified.
To when a certain percentage of
the samples in the node, say 90% for
example, have the same class labels.
The algorithm can stop expanding a node
when the number of samples in the node
falls below a certain minimum value.
A this point the number of
samples is too small to make
much difference in the classification
results with the further splitting.
The induction algorithm can stop expanding
a node when the improvement in impurity
measure is too small to make much of
a difference in classification results.
The algorithm can stop expanding a node
when the maximum tree depth is reached.
This is to control the complexity
of the resulting tree.
There can be other criteria that can be
used to determine when tree induction
should stop.
Let's take a look at an example to
illustrate the tree induction process.
Let's say that we want to classify loan
applicants as being likely to repay a loan
or not likely to repay a loan
based on their income and
amount of debt they already have.
Building a decision tree for
this classification problem
could proceed as follows.
Consider the input space of this
problem as shown in the left figure.
One way to split this
data set into homogeneous
subsets is to consider the decision
boundary where income equals t1.
To the right of this decision
boundary are mostly red samples and
to the left are mostly blue samples.
The subsets are not
completely homogeneous but
that is the best way to split the original
data set based on the variable income.
This decision boundary is represented
in the decision tree by the condition
Income is greater than
t1 at the root node.
This is the condition used to
split the original data set.
Samples with income greater
than the threshold value
of t1 are placed in the right subset and
samples with income less than or
equal to t1 are placed in the left subset,
just as shown in the right diagram.
The right subset is now labeled as red,
meaning that the loan applicant
is likely to be paid alone.
The second step then is to determine how
to split the region outlined in red.
As shown in the left diagram, in input
space, the best way to split this data
is specified by the second decision
boundary with debt equals t2.
This is represented in
the decision tree on the right
with the addition of the node with
condition debt greater than t2.
Samples with the value of debt greater
than t2 are shown in the region
above the decision boundary.
This region contains all blue samples and
so the corresponding node is labeled blue.
Meaning that the loan applicant
is not likely to repay the loan.
The third and final split looks at how
to split the region outlined in red
in the left diagram.
The best split is specified by
the boundary with income equals T3.
This splits the red region
into two pure subsets.
This split is represented in the decision
tree by adding a node with condition,
Income is greater than t3.
The left resulting node is labeled blue,
and
the right resulting node is labeled red,
corresponding to the resulting subsets
within the red border in the left diagram.
We end with the final
decision tree on the right,
which implements the decision boundaries
shown as dash lines in the left diagram.
These decision boundaries
partition the data set as shown.
The label for each region is determined by
the label of the majority of the samples.
These labels are reflected in
the leaf nodes of the decision tree.
Shown on the right.
You may have noticed that the decision
boundaries of a decision tree are parallel
to the axes formed by the variables,
this is referred to as being rectilinear.
The boundaries are rectilinear
because each split considers only
a single variable.
There are variance of the tree induction
algorithm that consider more than one
attribute when splitting a note.
However, each split has to consider all
combinations of combined variables and
so such induction algorithms are much
more computationally expensive.
There are a few important things to
note about the decision tree classifier.
The resulting tree is often simple
to understand and interpret.
This is one of the biggest advantages
of decision trees for classification.
It is often possible to look
at the resulting tree to see
which variables are important to
the classification problem and
understand how
the classification is performed.
For this reason, many people will start
out with the decision tree classifier
to get a feel for
the classification problem.
Even if they end up using more
sophisticated models later on.
The tree induction algorithm
as described in this lesson
is relatively computationally inexpensive.
So training a decision tree for
classification can be relatively fast.
The greedy approach used by tree induction
algorithm determines the best way to split
the portion of the data at a node but
does not guarantee the best solution
overall for the entire data set.
Decision boundaries are rectilinear.
This can limit the expressiveness
of the resulting model which means
that it may not be able to solve
complicated classification problems that
require more complex decision
boundaries to be formed.
In summary, the decision tree classifier
uses a tree like structure to specify
a series of conditions that are tested to
determine the class label for a sample.
The decision tree is constructed by
repeatedly splitting a data partition
into successively more
homogeneous subsets.
The resulting tree can
often be easy to interpret.